---
layout: post
title:  "New to MacOS in 2018"
date:   2018-11-24 00:00:00 -0700
categories: review
---

### Review: MacOS in 2018 from a Lifelong Windows user

So this is what it's like to fall in love with an OS

<blockquote> Just clarifying, I am not going to talk about the Apps Apple writes, like Garageband/Logic or Xcode, those deserve their own post </blockquote>

I ramble a lot and basically go through my whole history with computers, so I'm gonna summarize my feelings here. I hear a lot of negativity from the Mac community about how MacOS is going the wrong way and Apple doesn't care. As someone who came to MacOS from Windows in the last 6 months, who is well past the honeymoon period but still with one foot firmly in the Windows camp, I can say they're wrong. MacOS is the best OS hands down, and I think is a shining example of where computing needs to be heading. Now, without futher ado.

I have been using Windows my whole life. My first experience with the OS was a hand-me-down desktop with Windows 95, but I was so young I wasn't allowed to really touch it. I would use computers at the library and even then I loved computers. Eventually, I got a desktop with XP on it. From... maybe 2004 onward I was a Windows user. I was the guy hating Vista because it broke what XP got right. I fell in love with Windows 7, and hated Windows 8 because it broke what Windows 7 got right. Then onto Windows 10, which I personally felt was as close to perfect as Microsoft could make a modern OS. It wasn't 7, but it was a truly modern OS.

But, being a Windows guy, I had a unnatural, irrational hatred of Macs. Back in the PowerPC days, it was because PowerPC would never be as powerful as x86. Then it was because of the "Apple Tax". Or that "Macs weren't as flexible as PCs" or "Mac's are only for media". But always that it wasn't as good. I had some inklings to try it. When Apple went x86 I looked into those first Hackintosh projects. But I didn't have the hardware or a PC with UEFI at the time so nothing came of it.

But I ended up getting an iPhone. My opinions on Apple changed *quickly* after that. I wasn't quite convinced they were good, but Apple definitely had a lot more merit in my eyes. Then... came all the podcasts. It started with [CGP Grey](www.hellointernet.fm). Then the [Relay network](https://www.relay.fm/shows). Then ATP(http://atp.fm). And everyone just loved Apple. And half the people at my college had Macs. And at dev confereneces I'd see online, over half the PCs were Macbooks. Could it be I was [wrong](https://xkcd.com/1731/)? Me? Wrong? On the internet?

Well I had to find out. So I made a Hackintosh. This was late 2017. But the blog post is titled 2018 for a reason. I *cannot* recommend a Hackintosh. It is buggy, it is messy, it is *bad*. It felt like Windows. So I used that a few months. Then, I got a Macbook. A 2017 Macbook Air.

<blockquote> And I am here to say I was wrong. So wrong. So fucking wrong. </blockquote>

MacOS is amazing. Everything feels smooth, everything feels great, it's responsive. Having an OS that was designed for the hardware is a different experience. And don't get me wrong, I used Windows 8 and 10 on a Surface, so I had the "Microsoft" hardware experience. It just wasn't the same. MacOS is something else.

The first thing that stuck with me is how consistent the UI(User Interface) and UX(User Experience) is. I would hear before that people would talk about how a certain app would *look like a Mac app* or *not look like a Mac app*. And now I get it. Apple has such a strong design language, and I don't know if it's the programming tools on Mac or if it's the programmers who use Mac, but Mac apps "look like Mac apps". And it could be as simple as having the command key used more and more. It's the subtle things that are so clever and show the thought put into them. The Menu bar, which I hated at first, has become essential to me. That menus are always in the same place, depending on active app. And it allows apps to do insanely clever things. For example, IDEs can have a bunch of floating windows, or I could have 3-4 Terminal windows open, and one unified menu bar up top.

But besides the actual UX, the OS has been solid. The features of the OS that I loved in Windows 10, ~~I may sound like a time delayed broken record~~ turns out MacOS had them half a decade ago. The "stability" that Windows achieved, that I thought was exceptional, Mac had that a decade ago. And the customization, the hackability, that I valued *so much* in Windows, Mac has that too in droves, but in different way. It could be something subtle like having [Alfred](alfred-link) replace the Spotlight search. but it opens up a whole new world. And then you have *AppleScript*. Apple made a while scripting language for automation on the Mac. Apple made Automator. You have things like [Keyboard Maestro](keyboard-link) and [Text Expander](expander-link). All these would essentially be hidden except for an icon on the menu bar. Also, the whole Menu Bar app as an app category that *actually* got love instead of being a poor hack like on Windows.

The actual OS had a consistent look. It's unmistakably Mac. It's not like Windows, where every app has its own UI, its own conventions, it's own look, where each PC could look completely different depending on what app was running. *And don't get me started on Linux and FOSS UI*. And past the UI, I found a rich ecosystem of Mac developers who you could tell *loved* the Mac and everything about it. You had apps that have been around for decades like [BBedit](bb-link) or [Pcalc](calc-link). You have *relative* newcomers who just make simple apps for utility(like Marco Arments' [Quitter](quit-link)), and massive companies like OmniGroup and Affinity. And everything felt so well designed, so well thought out, and made for one thing, to get work done. I won't even go into the actual Apple designed apps like Garageband/Logic, Final Cut, or the iWork Suite. Those apps deserve and will get their own articles.

<blockquote> Macs were designed for work. They weren't expensive toys like I thought, and MacOS wasn't an inferior Windows.</blockquote>

But... and there always is a but, they're not perfect. [Mention Gaming][Mention free apps][Mention ubiquity][Mention electron]



Links to Mac Apps Mentioned
[alfred-link]:  
[keyboard-link]:
[expander-link]:
[bb-link]:
[calc-link]:
[quit-link]:
